* title
###
Structure of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis provides targets for treating tuberculosis
###

* authors
###
Martin G. Montgomery a,1 , Jessica Petri a,1, Tobias E. Spikes a,1 , and John E. Walker a,2
###

* affiliations
###
The Medical Research Council Mitochondrial Biology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom
###

* keywords
###
mycobacteria j ATP synthase j structure j regulation j rotary mechanism
###

* citation
###
Montgomery et al.
Structure of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis provides targets
for treating tuberculosis
###

* reference
###
PNAS 2021 Vol. 118 No. 47 e2111899118
###

* signifcance
###
As the world tackles the COVID-19 pandemic, other widespread infectious
diseases, including tuberculosis (TB), take their toll on humans, and those with
TB are more likely to die from COVID-19 infection. Bedaquiline (BD), an anti-TB
drug, combats multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis by preventing a
molecular machine known as the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthase from
generating ATP, the fuel needed to keep it alive. However, BD-resistant strains
of M. tuberculosis have arisen. Here, we describe features of the mycobacterial
ATP synthase that are not present in the human enzyme. Potentially these
features can be exploited for the development of new anti-TB drugs unrelated to
BD to prevent and cure TB by inhibiting the formation of ATP by the pathogen.
###

* metadata
###
Author contributions: J.E.W. designed research; M.G.M., J.P., and T.E.S.
performed research; M.G.M., J.P., T.E.S., and J.E.W. analyzed data; M.G.M. and
J.E.W. wrote the paper; and J.E.W. supervised the project.

Reviewers: T.M.D., State University of New York Upstate Medical University; and
D.M.M., Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science.

The authors declare no competing interest.

This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0
(CC BY).

M.G.M., J.P., and T.E.S. contributed equally to this work.

To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: walker@mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk.

This article contains supporting information online at
http://www.pnas.org/lookup/ suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.2111899118/-/DCSupplemental.

Published November 15, 2021.

* doi
###
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2111899118
###

* journal
###
BIOCHEMISTRY
###

* review
###
Contributed by John E. Walker, October 13, 2021 (sent for review June 28, 2021; reviewed by Thomas M. Duncan and David M. Mueller)
###

Montgomery et al.
Structure of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis provides targets
for treating tuberculosis

Montgomery et al.
Structure of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis provides targets for
treating tuberculosis

* figures
###
Fig. 1. The structure and subunit composition of ATP synthase from M. smegmatis.
(A–D) Four views of the electron density of the intact enzyme in state s1a
(EMD-12377). The colors corresponding to each subunit are indicated in A. In
B–D, the views are rotated by 90° from left to right about the vertical axis
running through the central stalk and the center of the c9-ring. The
mycobacterial ATP synthase consists of three copies of the α-subunit, with an
extended C terminus unique to Mycobacteria; three copies of the β-subunit; nine
copies of the c-subunit; and one copy each of the γ-, ε-, a-, b0 -, and
bδsubunits. The latter is also unique to Mycobacteria and comprises a canonical
b-subunit fused to a canonical δ-subunit via an additional bundle of seven
α-helices. The black bars represent the IPM. Protons are translocated from the
periplasm (P) to the cytoplasm via the interface between a- and c-subunits.

Fig. 2. Structures of states and substates in the catalytic cycle of the ATP
synthase from M. smegmatis. (A–C) The structures of the three main states, S1 to
S3, deﬁned by the position of the rotor relative to the stator. Each 360° rotary
cycle is composed of the transitions S1 to S2, S2 to S3, and S3 to S1. In state
S2, the rotor has turned 120° relative to state S1 and in state S3 by 120°
relative to state S2. In states S1 and S3, substates S1a to S1e and S3a to S3c,
(C) Superimposition of substates S3a to S3c, colored yellow, cyan, and red,
respectively. The substates are aligned via their a-subunits. In states S1 and
S3, respectively, were resolved. (A) Superimposition of substates S1a to S1e,
colored tan, green, magenta, pale blue, and dark blue, respectively. (B) State
S2. the F1 and PS domains occupy a variety of positions (although in an
alignment of the substates via the crown of the F1-domain, the nucleotide
occupancies of the F1 domains are identical and the position of the γ-subunit is
approximately constant). In substate S1a, the rotor has turned one c-subunit
onward in a hydrolytic direction compared to S1b to S1e (see Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. Symmetry mismatch in the substate rotors. By aligning all of the
substate models via their a-subunits, the rotation of the c9-ring was tracked
through the substates via the c-subunit located directly beneath the β-sheet
domain of the ε-subunit. (A) View from above substate S1a with the ε-, a-, and
c-subunits colored green, sky blue, and gray, respectively, with the c-subunit
directly beneath the ε-subunit in red. (B–E) Similar views of substates with the
ε-subunit removed and the equivalent c-subunit in each substate colored. (B)
Substate S1a. (C) Overlays of the c-rings from substates S1b to e. In these
substates, the equivalent c-subunits have rotated approximately one c-monomer
further round in the synthesis direction (anticlockwise). In C, the highlighted
c-subunit of S1b (yellow) has rotated by ca. 40°, whereas in substates S1c to
S1e it has rotated by ca. 42° to approximately the same position shown in red.
In D, state S2 has rotated two c-monomers further round with a corresponding
rotation of ca. 120°. In E, substates S3a to c have rotated by a further three
c-monomers (ca. 280°). (F) Summary of the positions of the c-rings in the three
main states S1, S2, and S3.

Fig. 4. Auto-inhibition of hydrolysis in the ATP synthase from M. smegmatis. (A
and B) The extended “hook” provided by residues in the C-terminal region of an
α-subunit (red) engaged in a “loop” provided by residues 205 to 227 of a
γ-subunit (blue). The ε-subunit (green) is bound to this region of the γ-subunit
and attaches the central stalk (subunits γ and ε) to the c9-ring (gray).
Together, the γ- and ε-subunits plus the c9-ring constitute the enzyme's rotor.
The subunits are depicted in cartoon representation, except for the γ-subunit in
B, which is in space-ﬁlling format. (C–E) The electrostatic potentials of the
surfaces of the elements of the hook and loop mechanism of inhibition of ATP
hydrolysis. (C) The loop. (D) The two opposing surfaces of the “hook” with the
positively charged surface that engages the negatively charged “loop” during ATP
hydrolysis on the left. (E) The hook engaged in the loop. (F) During ATP
synthesis, the positively charged face shown on the right is presented to the
positively charged external surface of the “loop” and is repelled. Hence, the
inhibitory mechanism is unidirectional. In A–F, the model of the rotor in state
3 is depicted (PDB ID code 7NKO). (G–L) The “fail-safe” mechanism augmenting the
“hook–loop” catch mechanism involving an interaction between residues γ166 and
179 and b0 Arg72. (G) The encircled region denotes the “fail-safe” device. It
occurs between the rotor and the stator in state 1, and especially in substates
S1c, S1d, and S1e, which are shown in cartoon format superimposed via their
a-subunits. (H and I) Close-up views from the side and from above, respectively,
showing in stick representation the interaction between negatively charged
residues γAsp170 and γAsp171 with positively charged b0 Arg72. The diameter of
the dotted circle is 7.7 Å corresponding to the distance between the Cα atoms of
γAsp171 and bArg72 in substate S1d.

Fig. 5. Structure of the bδ-subunit and its interactions with α-subunits in the
ATP synthase from M. smegmatis. (A) The bδ-subunit (pink) viewed from above the
crown of the F1-domain toward the IPM consists of 16 α-helices, bδH1 to bδH16,
with a single intervening β-strand between bδH14 and bδH15 and three additional
β-strands between bδH15 and bδH16. In this view, bδH1, which traverses the IPM,
is not visible. (B) The three domains of the bδsubunit, with the N-terminal
“b”-domain (pink) consisting of bδH1 to bδH3, followed by the central “linking
domain” (tan) consisting of bδH4 to bδH8, and the C-terminal “δ”-domain (pale
blue), consisting of bδH9 to bδH16. (C) Superimposition of the “δ-domain” (pale
blue) and the “linking domain” (tan) by a clockwise rotation of ca.120° (see
Movie S7). (D and E) Interactions of the N-terminal α-helical regions (labeled
α1, α2, and α3) of the three α-subunits (red) with the bδ-subunit. Elements of
the α- and β-subunits in the “crown” region of the F1-domain are colored red and
yellow, respectively. In D part of the b-subunit (residues 130 to 166) is
orange. In E relative to D, the view has been rotated by 90° toward the viewer.
(F) The same view as in A–C illustrating the similarity of the modes of binding
of N-terminal regions α2 and α3 to the “linking domain” (tan) and the “δ-domain”
(pale blue), respectively. In D, the N-terminal region α1 is bound close to the
PS and interacting with bδH2, bδH16, the immediately preceding β-strand, and the
b0 subunit (orange). This mode of interaction differs from those of α2 and α3.
For the mode of binding of α2 in other bacterial enzymes see SI Appendix, Fig.
S20.

Fig. 6. Proton half-channels in the ATP synthase from M. smegmatis. (A) The
a-subunit (blue) viewed from approximately the center of the c9-ring toward the
lipid bilayer. The inlet and outlet proton half-channels depicted by green and
orange spheres, respectively, contain polar residues in the otherwise
hydrophobic protein. The essential residue aArg188, located between the two
half-channels, deprotonates the carboxylic groups of cGlu65 residues as they are
rotated into the inlet half-channel. (B and C) Comparison of the electrostatic
surfaces of the a-subunits from M. smegmatis and Bos taurus, respectively,
illustrating the similar locations of the inlet and outlets of the two
half-channels. The electrostatic range is 10 (red), 0 (white), +10 (blue). (D
and E) Views, respectively, of the a-subunit (blue) from inside and from above
the plane of the bacterial IPM from the cytoplasmic side showing its spatial
relationship to the c9-ring (in cartoon representation in D and showing
cross-sections of α-helices in E). Protons enter the inlet channel (green) from
the periplasm, passing between α-helices aH5 and aH6 and onto the negatively
charged carboxyl of a cE65 residue. The protonation of a cE65 at the inlet is
accompanied by the deprotonation of a cE65 residue in the outlet half-channel.
The application of the pmf to the c9-ring via the Grotthuss water chain in the
inlet channel (not resolved) rotates the c9-ring in the anticlockwise direction
as viewed from above.

###

* abstract
###
The structure has been determined by electron cryomicroscopy of the adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis. This analysis confrms
features in a prior description of the structure of the enzyme, but it also
describes other highly signifcant attributes not recognized before that are
crucial for understanding the mechanism and regulation of the mycobacterial
enzyme. First, we resolved not only the three main states in the catalytic cycle
described before but also eight substates that portray structural and
mechanistic changes occurring during a 360° catalytic cycle. Second, a mechanism
of auto-inhibition of ATP hydrolysis involves not only the engagement of the
C-terminal region of an α-subunit in a loop in the γ-subunit, as proposed
before, but also a “fail-safe” mechanism involving the b0 -subunit in the
peripheral stalk that enhances engagement. A third unreported characteristic is
that the fused bδ-subunit contains a duplicated domain in its N-terminal region
where the two copies of the domain participate in similar modes of attachment of
the two of plus the associated “fail-safe” mechanisms and the modes of three
N-terminal regions of the α-subunits. The auto-inhibitory attachment of the
α-subunits provide targets for development of innovative antitubercular drugs.
The structure also provides support for an observation made in the bovine ATP
synthase that the transmembrane proton-motive force that provides the energy to
drive the rotary mechanism is delivered directly and tangentially to the rotor
via a Grotthuss water chain in a polar L-shaped tunnel.
###

* paper
###
The adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthase in Mycobacterium tuberculosis is the
antimicrobial target for the treatment of tuberculosis (TB) with the drug
bedaquiline (BD), but despite the effectiveness of this drug for treatment of
multiple extremely and totally drug-resistant strains of the pathogen, BD
resistance has been observed already in clinical isolates (1). Moreover,
patients treated with BD have a fivefold higher risk of death than a placebo
control group, possibly because of its effects on the human ATP synthase (2).
Thus, one possible strategy to combat the growing threat of TB is to identify
other inhibitors acting at novel sites of the mycobacterial ATP synthase that
could be developed into antibiotics without these side effects. Detailed
knowledge of the structure and properties of the enzyme would be helpful in this
quest, and the closely related ATP synthase in the nonpathogenic species
Mycobacterium smegmatis provides an excellent model for the enzyme from the
pathogen. Like other mycobacteria, M. smegmatis is covered by a complex cell
envelope of three distinct layers, consisting of the inner plasma membrane
(IPM), the peptidoglycan–arabinogalactan complex, and the outer membrane, which
is linked covalently to the arabinogalactan (3). The membrane domain of the
mycobacterial ATP synthase is embedded in the IPM, with the catalytic F1-domain
of the enzyme extending into the bacterial cytoplasm and attached to the
membrane domain by a central stalk and a peripheral stalk (PS). As do other ATP
synthases in eubacteria, chloroplasts, and mitochondria, the enzyme couples a
proton-motive force (pmf) across the IPM generated by respiration to the
synthesis in the F1-domain of the enzyme of ATP from adenosine

diphosphate (ADP) and phosphate by a mechanical rotary mechanism (4). The
mycobacterial rotor consists of a membrane-bound ring of nine c-subunits (5),
attached to an elongated central stalk, made of single copies of the γ- and
ε-subunits. This central stalk is common to all F-type ATP synthases and
penetrates into the spherical part of the F1-domain, an assembly of three
α-subunits and three β-subunits arranged in alternation around the central axis
(6). The turning of the asymmetrical rotor brings about a series of
conformational changes in the three catalytic sites, which lie at three of the
six interfaces between α- and β-subunits, leading sequentially to the binding of
the substrates ADP and phosphate, the formation of ATP, and finally the release
of ATP. Three ATP molecules are produced by each 360° rotary cycle (4). The
α3β3-domain is attached to the a-subunit in the membrane domain by the PS (7).
The mycobacterial PS is made of two proteins, bδ and b0 . The bδ-subunit has
been described as a covalent fusion of the separate b- and δ-subunits found in
many other eubacteria (8). The b0 -subunit is orthologous (but not identical) to
the b-component of the bδ-subunit, and both the b-component and the b0 -subunit
have N-terminal hydrophobic regions, each capable of forming single
(9–11), the corresponding α-helices interact with the final component of the
transmembrane α-helices. In other bacterial ATP synthases of known structure
stator, the single a-subunit, and hold it in contact with the rotating c-ring in
order to maintain the integrity of the two proton half-channels, thereby
maintaining the coupling of

ATP synthases to the transmembrane pmf. Protons cross the membrane via two
half-channels at the interface between the rotating ring and the relatively
static stator component of the ATP synthase (4, 12, 13), and they provide the
energy from the pmf required to generate the turning of the rotor. Previously,
we have described the atomic structure of the F1-catalytic domain of the ATP
synthase from M. smegmatis determined by X-ray crystallography (6), and recently
an independent structure has been described of the entire mycobacterial complex
determined by electron cryomicroscopy (cryo-EM) of purified single particles of
the enzyme inhibited by BD (14). In this analysis, three catalytic states of the
enzyme were resolved corresponding to the same inhibited catalytic state in the
three different positions relative to the single PS. In addition, a novel method
of auto-inhibition was suggested by the association of one of the extended
structures in the C-terminal region of the α-subunits with a loop region in the
γ-subunit. Both the C-terminal extension in the α-subunits and the additional
loop in the γ-subunit are conserved in mycobacterial ATP synthases but are not
found elsewhere among eubacterial, chloroplast, or mitochondrial ATP synthases.
Here, we describe an independent structural analysis of the mycobacterial enzyme
inhibited by BD. This structure not only confirms many of the features in the
earlier structures of the enzyme (6, 14) but also it provides evidence of other
highly significant features that have not been described before that are crucial
for understanding the mechanism and regulation of the mycobacterial enzyme. Most
notably, we have resolved not only the three main states in the catalytic cycle
but also eight additional substates, thereby elaborating structural and
mechanistic changes that occur during a 360° catalytic cycle. Second, the
auto-inhibitory mechanism has been extended to involve not only the C-terminal
region of an α-subunit and a loop in the γ-subunit, as proposed before (14), but
also the b0 -subunit in the PS. Third, we have demonstrated that the fused
bδ-subunit contains a duplicated domain in its N-terminal region where the two
copies of the domain participate in similar modes of attachment of the two of
three N-terminal regions of the α-subunits. Another significant feature of the
structure is that it provides further support for an observation made in the
bovine ATP synthase that the transmembrane pmf that provides the energy to turn
the enzyme’s rotor is delivered directly and tangentially to the rotor via a
Grotthuss water chain in a polar L-shaped tunnel formed at the inlet
half-channel (15). Subsequently, a similar mechanism has been proposed to
operate in the yeast V-type ATPase, based on a structure determined at ca. 2.7
Å, where ordered chains of water molecules were observed in both the inlet and
outlet half-channels (16) Results and Discussion The Structure of Mycobacterial
ATP Synthase. Single particles of the ATP synthase from M. smegmatis purified in
the presence of detergent (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 and Table S1) and inhibited with
BD were subject to cryo-EM analysis. A total of 63 maps and 27 models of the
enzyme were resolved and refined with resolutions ranging from 2.11 to 4.15 Å
(SI Appendix, Figs. S2 and S3 and Tables S2 and S3). The best-resolved model,
that of substate S1a (see below; Protein Data Bank [PDB] ID code 7NJK) is at a
resolution of 2.5 to 3.4 Å. For the quality of the electron density of each
subunit, see SI Appendix, Fig. S4. The model of substate S1a (Fig. 1 and Movie
S1) contains the following residues: αE 5 to 21, 29 to 406, 411 to 521; αTP 5 to
21, 29 to 406, 411 to 521; αDP 6 to 406, 413 to 521, 527 to 545; βE 8 to 471;
βTP 7 to 475; βDP 8 to 475; γ 3 to 213, 220 to 304; ε 3 to 120; a 10 to 247; bδ
1 to 162, 169 to 444; b0 22 to 166; c 3 to 86 (in all nine copies). Each
nucleotide binding site in the three α-subunits and in subunit βTP is occupied
by an ATP molecule

with an accompanying Mg2+ ion, while the site in subunit βDP has ADP and an
accompanying Mg2+ ion. The sixth nucleotide binding site in subunit βE contains
an ADP molecule with neither accompanying Mg2+ nor phosphate (see SI Appendix,
Fig. S5). For comparison, in a similar cryo-EM analysis of single particles of
the same mycobacterial ATP synthase, 12 maps and models were resolved with
resolutions ranging from 3.2 to 3.7 Å (14). In that study, the best-resolved
model (PDB ID code 7JGA, 3.2 Å) has the following residues: αE 7 to 520; αTP 9
to 22, 29 to 515, 533 to 546; αDP 8 to 22, 28 to 545; βE 8 to 471; βTP 8 to 471;
βDP 8 to 471; γ 4 to 164, 178 to 213, 220 to 303; ε 3 to 119; a 31 to 113, 123
to 246; bδ 1 to 157, 169 to 331, 337 to 444; b0 24 to 164; c 5 to 85 (in all
nine copies). The occupancy of nucleotides is as follows (PDB ID code 7JGA): ATP
is present in all three α-subunits, and ADP is present in βTP, with a Mg2+ ion
coordinated by the nucleotide and a threonine residue (αThr179 or βThr167) and
water molecules in each case. Neither βDP nor βE has a bound nucleotide,
probably as there were no exogenous nucleotides present throughout the
purification process. A phosphate has been modeled in βE at the top of the
binding site near to Glu196, Asp254, and Arg376. One major difference is that in
the prior study (14) BD was wellresolved bound to the c9-ring at the interface
with the a-subunit. In the current study, the concentration of BD employed was
almost an order of magnitude lower (25 μM instead of 200 μM), and this lower
concentration proved to be suboptimal for the detection of the BD itself, as the
drug was present in only a minority of particles. Therefore, in the various
states and substates (see below) the density for BD is highly variable. Also, in
the earlier study, a different detergent was used in the isolation of the intact
particles of the enzyme, and that also may have influenced the binding of BD to
the enzyme. While it is possible that differing detergent, BD, or nucleotide
concentrations in the enzyme preparations may be responsible for the wider range
of substates observed, each of the substates in the current work have exactly
the same nucleotide occupancies and this is mirrored in recently reported
substates in the Escherichia coli enzyme (17), suggesting that the resolved
substates are nucleotide-independent. It is also possible that further
refinement of the particle classes in the previous data (14) could reveal some
or all of the substates presented here. However, in the current work, by
combining the membrane domains of all of the particles, bound BD could be
modeled in the same position as previously reported in close proximity to the
N-terminal region of aH5 of the c-subunit in a position that would inhibit ATP
synthesis (see SI Appendix, Fig. S6). This position is the “lagging” site (14).
In some reconstructions, partial nonprotein densities were observed at the
opposite side of the a–c interface in close proximity to the C-terminal region
of aH5 as in the prior publication. However, the densities were poorly defined
and it would be tenuous, in the absence of previously published results (14), to
assign them definitively as BD molecules. Similar to the prior study (14), the
electron density maps for each of states S1 to S3 has density for both tethered
and untethered forms, and hence those particle classes contain enzymes that are
auto-inhibited and others that are not inhibited by this mechanism. In the
tethered forms the mycobacterial-specific extensions of the α-subunit make
contact with the γ-subunit. In the untethered forms, these regions are
disordered in the reconstructions and are presumably freely moving in the
adjacent aqueous environment.

Catalytic States and Substates.

The three catalytic sites in the F1 domain of ATP synthases are arranged at 120°
intervals around the rotor, and active ATP synthases have been defined in three
main states distinguished from each other by the position of the rotor relative
to the stator. Extensive classification of the data for the mycobacterial ATP
synthase revealed the presence of

not only the three main states referred to as S1, S2, and S3 but also of
substates within them (Fig. 2). Substates S1a to S1e are in S1, and S3a to S3c
are in S3. Two further substates were detected in state S1, and one in state S2,
but the number of particles collected in each instance was insufficient to allow
accurate models to be built (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). Alignment of the substates
in S1 and S3 with the three states observed previously via their a-subunits
showed that substate S1a (PDB ID code 7NJK) closely matches the earlier state 1
(PDB ID code 7JG5) and S2 (PDB ID code 7NJP) is closely similar to the previous
state 2 (PDB ID code 7JG6). In their membrane domains, substates S3a (PDB ID
code 7NJQ), S3b (PDB ID code 7NJR), and S3c (PDB ID code 7NJS) are similar to
the earlier state 3 (PDB ID code 7JG7), but there are significant deviations in
the F1 and PS domains (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). The main differences between the
substates within each state are that the positions of the PS and F1 domains vary
such that the F1-domain (including the α-helical coiled-coil of the γ-subunit)
appears to pivot around the PS during the catalytic cycle (Movies S2 and S3).
Pivot points are located around residues 59 to 66 in the b-subunit, residues 34
to 41 in the bδ-subunit, and residues 43 and 233 in the γ-subunit (SI Appendix,
Figs. S8 and S9). However, alignment of the substates via the “crown” in the
F1-domain shows that they have identical nucleotide occupancies and that the
position of the γ-subunit is also maintained. Alignment of the substates via the
a-subunit demonstrates that the c9-rings and the membrane α-helices of the a-,
b-, and bδ-subunits of the substates are in identical positions, as are the
ε-subunits, and in some instances the lower part of the γ-subunit. As in all
other F-ATPases, the F1 catalytic domain has threefold pseudosymmetry with each
catalytic interface of the α- and β-subunits separated by 120°. However, similar
to the F-ATPases from Paracoccus denitrificans and Spirulina platensis which,
respectively, have c12 and c15 rotor rings (9, 18), the

mycobacterial c9-ring has a symmetry related to that of the F1-domain, whereas
in other species where the number of c-subunits is not divisible by 3 there is a
“symmetry mismatch” between the catalytic and c-ring rotor domains. This
symmetry mismatch has been invoked as being part of a mechanism for storing
energy transiently in the γ-subunit as the ring rotates (4). This energy is
released subsequently in quanta to generate the observed stepping of the rotor
(the γ-subunit) in the F1region. Despite the symmetry correspondence between its
F1 and c-ring domains in the structure of the enzyme from M. smegmatis, a
symmetry mismatch between the two domains persists here also. The presence of
this mismatch is demonstrated by catalytic states S1 to S3, which do not display
threefold symmetry and are not separated from each other by 120° (Fig. 3). Thus,
as the structures of γ-subunits are highly conserved, it appears that there is a
conservation of an energetic mismatch between the two domains that is
independent of symmetry. Thus, as illustrated in Fig. 3 and Movie S4, by using
the c-subunit directly under the ε-subunit as a marker, the rotation of the ring
can be tracked through the substates (Fig. 3A). In S1, the rotor turns almost
one c-subunit onward (ca. 40°) from S1a (Fig. 3B), in the direction of synthesis
(anticlockwise from above) to substate S1b, which also moves the γ- and
ε-subunits relative to the other states. Further round from S1b by ca. 2° lie
S1c to S1e, which have similar c-ring positions to each other (Fig. 3C), but
there are large differences in the F1 domain and in the PS. The positions of the
top of the PS suggest that the order of procession is S1a > S1b > S1e > S1d >
S1c. As the inhibitory tether is attached in some of the particles, this
movement of the rotor in S1a and S1b may also be responsible for additional
differences in the F1-domain and the PS compared to S1c to S1e. In S2 (where
there are no resolved substates) the c-ring has traveled two c-monomers further
round (ca.120°), and in state 3 substates S3a to S3c have all traveled on to
approximately the same position, four c-monomers (or ca. PNAS j 3 of 9

280°) further on (Fig. 3 D and E). Again, the position of the PS suggests that
the order of substates is either S3c > S3a > S3b or S3b > S3a > S3c. Thus, the
order of all the resolved substates in the synthesis direction is either S1a >
S1b > S1e > S1d > S1c > S2 > S3c > S3a > S3b (Movie S2) or S1a > S1b > S1e > S1d
> S1c > S2 > S3b > S3a > S3c (Movies S3. Among the substates reported in the ATP
synthase from E. coli (17), one substate, S1a, also corresponds to a rotor turn
of one c-subunit. However, relative to the mycobacterial enzyme, the
accompanying movement in the γ- and ε-subunits is much less, probably because
the E. coli ε-subunit is in the inhibitory “up” position (19) where its
C-terminal domain occupies the cavity next to the α-helical coiled-coil of the
γ-subunit in F1-domain of the enzyme, and similarly for the ATP synthase from
Geobacillus stearothermophilus (11). In the mycobacterial ATP synthase it is not
known whether the ε-subunit, which is observed in the “down” position in the
structure, can also assume the “up” position, but there is no evidence that it
does so (20, 21). Thus, it appears that the mycobacterial PS, as proposed in
other ATP synthases where there is a mismatch of symmetries between F1 and
c-ring domains (4, 22), also acts as a spring that stores and then releases
energy to generate the steps in the F1-domain during rotation (17, 23) (see SI
Appendix, Figs. S10 and S11 and Movies S2, S3, and S5, illustrating the
transitions during synthesis, in Movies S2 and S3, and in hydrolysis, in Movie
S5, by the ATP synthases from M. smegmatis).

Auto-Inhibition of ATP Hydrolysis.

The structure of the ATP synthase from M. smegmatis suggests a tether mechanism
for the inhibition of ATP hydrolysis, and of the accompanying reversal of the
direction of turning of the rotor and expulsion of protons from the bacterial
cytoplasm that would happen when the pmf is disrupted, for example under
anaerobic conditions (14). This mechanism has two elements based upon structural
features that are unique to the mycobacterial ATP synthases. In the first
element (Fig. 4 A–F and SI Appendix, Fig. S12) described before (14), residues
520 to 548 extend from the C-terminal

region of α-subunits and provide a “hook” which catches into a “loop” provided
by residues 212 to 220 in the lower globular domain of the γ-subunit, thereby
tethering the stator and rotor together and inhibiting rotation (see also Movie
S6). An important feature of this tether mechanism is that it is unidirectional,
operating only in the hydrolytic direction of rotation when their interacting
surfaces have complementary charges (Fig. 4 C–E). In contrast, in the synthetic
direction, as the interacting surfaces are both negatively charged they will
repel each other, thereby preventing an inhibited complex from forming. This
part of the tether mechanism is consistent with the observation that the
treatment of the F1-ATPase from M. smegmatis with trypsin activates its ATP
hydrolytic activity as trypsinolysis removes residues 543 to 548 of the
α-subunits and disrupts the loop region by cleaving the γ-subunit after residue
219 (6) (see SI Appendix, Fig. S13). The second element of this inhibitory
mechanism depicted in Fig. 4 G–I and SI Appendix, Figs. S14 and S15 has not been
described previously, and it provides a “fail-safe” device. During rotation
through S1 in either direction, the γ-subunit approaches very close to the PS at
b0 Arg72, and potentially a salt bridge could form between this residue and
either γAsp170 or γAsp171. Unlike the tether, which can be formed in any of S1
to S3, this feature can form only in S1, when, during rotation, the γ-subunit
comes sufficiently close to the PS for a salt bridge to form. Hence, if the hook
fails to engage in the loop and form the tether in S2 and S3, in S1 the
proximity of b0 Arg72 and γAsp170 plus γAsp171, and the formation of the salt
bridge, will increase the likelihood of the hook’s engaging in the loop in this
state as the hook would be prevented from slipping around the γ-subunit because
of the proximity of residues γ168 to 175 to the PS. In M. tuberculosis, residues
168 to 175 EGDDAGAD in M. smegmatis are replaced by residues 168 to 174 GEDQRSD,
and b0 Arg72 in M. smegmatis is substituted by b0 Lys72 in M. tuberculosis.
Although the changed sequences in M. tuberculosis could conceivably affect the
fold of the loop and the possibility of forming a salt bridge with b0 Lys72, it
is highly likely that this region of the γ-subunit Montgomery et al. Structure
of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis provides targets for treating
tuberculosis


would still come into contact with the PS and that the “failsafe” mechanism will
operate in the pathogen also. These observations expand on preliminary
biochemical data that residues γ 168 to 175 are involved in regulation of the
enzyme (24). These features are not present in the ATP synthases from either E.
coli (see SI Appendix, Fig. S15) or G. stearothermophilus where, during a 360°
rotary cycle, the γ-subunits do not come close to the PS. In the prior structure
of the ATP synthase from M. smegmatis, residues 164 to 177 were disordered. The
PS. The PS is a key component of the enzyme’s stator joining the external
surface of the α3β3-spherical component of the catalytic domain to the a-subunit
in the membrane domain, thereby helping to ensure the maintenance of the contact
between the membrane domains of the rotor and the stator during catalysis (4).
The simplest examples are found in some eubacteria and chloroplasts where the
N-terminal domain of the δ-subunit is attached noncovalently to N-terminal
extensions of the three α-subunits, and its C-terminal domain forms other
noncovalent interactions with the C-terminal regions of two identical b-subunits
(as in E. coli, for example) or two nonidentical but orthologous b- and b0
-subunits, as in cyanobacteria (25, 26) and chloroplasts (27), for example.
Metazoan and fungal mitochondrial ATP synthases have a related but more complex
PS where the OSCP (oligomycin sensitivity conferral protein) subunit, Montgomery
et al. Structure of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis provides
targets for treating tuberculosis

which is orthologous to the bacterial δ-subunits (28), also binds to the
N-terminal regions of the three α-subunits and joins to a long and complex
α-helical structure that extends to and penetrates the inner mitochondrial
membrane, where it helps to hold the a-subunit of the stator against the c-ring
of the rotor. The composition and structure of the PS in mycobacteria has
similarities to the PS regions in other prokaryotic ATP synthases, but there are
significant differences. In the structure of the M. smegmatis ATP synthase, the
PS is a complex of a single b0 -subunit (similar to b0 -subunits in bacteria
[see SI Appendix, Fig. S16] and chloroplasts) and the unique bδ-subunit. This
bδ-subunit has been described previously as a fusion protein with a linking
region between the C-terminal region of the b-subunit and the N-terminal region
of the δ-subunit with the δ-subunit component bound noncovalently to the
N-terminal regions of the three α-subunits (14). However, as described below,
this description is inaccurate. In the current structure, the bδ-subunit
consists of 16 α-helices with a β-strand separating bδH14 and bδH15, with three
additional β-strands between bδH15 and bδH16 (Fig. 5 A and B). These structural
elements form three separate domains. The N-terminal “b” domain is similar to
those of other bacterial b-subunits (see SI Appendix, Fig. S17). Its structure
consists of bδH1 to bδH3 and is similar to the equivalent region of a canonical
bacterial b-subunit with bδH1 spanning the bacterial IPM. α-Helix bδH1 and the
equivalent, but nonassociated, b0 H1 bind to separate regions of the a-subunit
and help to maintain the integrity of the transmembrane proton pathway. α-Helix
bδH2 extends vertically from the IPM and then runs along the external surface of
the F1-domain, and finally links to bδH3, which extends the PS to the top of the
F1-domain. Then, bδH4 to bδH8 form a separate domain, named the “linking
domain,” which is attached to bδH9 in the third domain, named “the δ-domain,”
consisting of bδH9 to bδH16. The δ-domain is similar to the canonical δ-subunits
in other eubacteria (SI Appendix, Fig. S18). However, a feature not remarked on
previously is that the bδH4

to bδH8 linking domain can be superimposed onto the δ-domain by a clockwise
rotation of ca.120° (see Fig. 5C and Movie S7). Therefore, the δ- and linking
domains appear to have arisen by a process that involves a gene duplication
event at some point during evolution. The amino acid sequences of the two
domains are ca. 20% identical, and a further 20% of residues are substituted
conservatively (SI Appendix, Fig. S19). In the structure, there was no density
for residues 1 to 21 of subunit b0 although they are present in the assembled
enzyme (SI Appendix, Table S1). Thus, the bδ-subunit has two structurally
related domains and each Montgomery et al.

Structure of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis provides targets
for treating tuberculosis

binds to the N-terminal region of an α-subunit (subunits α2 and α3) in a similar
fashion with the third α-subunit attached by a different mode (Fig. 5 D–F). In
other bacterial species, the mode of binding of the N-terminal region α2 differs
from the mode of binding in the M. smegmatis ATP synthase, as illustrated in SI
Appendix, Fig. S20. At present, it is not clear what advantage, if any, is
associated with the similarity of the modes of binding of N-terminal regions of
α2 and α3. Proton Translocation. One of the most important and fundamental
mechanistic features resolved in the recent structure of the dimeric bovine ATP
synthase is the Grotthuss chain of water molecules in the inverted L-shaped
proton inlet half-channel that leads from the intermembrane space of the
mitochondria to the essential γ-carboxylate found on the c-subunit lying at the
end of this half-channel (15). This Grotthuss water chain allows the full effect
of the transmembrane proton motive force to be applied directly and tangentially
to the c-ring to drive its rotation in the direction required for ATP synthesis.
In the mycobacterial enzyme, this inverted L-shaped half-channel is clearly
present (Fig. 6), but the water molecules that form the Montgomery et al.
Structure of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis provides targets for
treating tuberculosis

Grotthuss chain were not resolved. The mycobacterial inlet channel in the
a-subunit contains the polar residues aHis12, aHis15, aHis16, aAsp30, aAsn104,
aGln112, aAsp117, aGlu122, aLys125, aGln192, aLys219, aAsp222, and aGln229,
which are probably involved in the coordination of the water molecules that form
the Grotthuss chain (SI Appendix, Fig. S21). The proton inlet pathway then
passes through a small aperture between α-helices aH5 and aH6 formed by residues
aGly196 and aAsp222 into the interface between the a-subunit and the c-ring. A
gap leading to this channel is plugged by residue Gln7 of the b-subunit and
another, between aLeu111 and aTyr124, leads to the membrane and is presumably
blocked by lipids (SI Appendix, Figs. S22 and S23). As in the bovine and other
ATP synthases, the outlet channel is more open and funnel-shaped. Polar residues
aHis146, aArg153, aLys161, aHis166, aAsn174, aGlu177, aGlu178, aLys181, aSer184,
aTyr240, aGln243, and aGlu246 are found in this region. Although the positions
and overall polarities of the inlet and outlet half-channels are conserved in
mitochondrial and bacterial ATP synthases, in general specific polar residues
are not conserved, with the exception of aArg188, and aGly196 found at the
aperture between the two

arms of L-shaped inlet half-channel plus aAsn192 close to aGly196 and aArg188,
and aTyr240 which is between aArg188 and the other residues of the outlet
channel (see Fig. 6 and SI Appendix, Fig. S21).

during its assembly, thereby preventing the coupling of the pmf to the synthesis
of ATP. Once such inhibitors had been identified, then would follow the
extensive process of converting them into effective drugs for treating TB.

Potential Drug Targets. The present structure of the ATP synthase from M.
smegmatis confirms the site of binding of BD described previously and also
defines three unique features that have the potential to be exploited in the
design of new inhibitors that could be developed into novel drugs against TB.
The first of these sites involves the “hook” and “catch” features involved in
the ATP hydrolytic inhibitory mechanism, described also in the prior structure.
The second is the “fail-safe” device that is likely to enhance the engagement of
the hook and loop in state S1. The third is the unique mode of association of
the PS with the N-terminal regions of the α-subunits. The “hook and catch”
device could be locked in place by small molecules that bind to both features,
thereby preventing synthesis of ATP. The “fail-safe” interaction could either be
augmented by a small molecule binding across the feature, or its formation could
be impeded by small molecules binding to its two elements. Compounds with the
features of suitably designed “molecular glues” (29) might enhance the stability
of both features and be effective inhibitors of ATP synthesis by the enzyme. The
third target would require small molecules that would impede the attachment of
the PS to the F1-domain

Materials and Methods

The mycobacterial ATP synthase was overexpressed in M. smegmatis mc24517 from a
plasmid containing the entire atp operon from M. smegmatis mc2155 modiﬁed to
encode a b0 -subunit with a C-terminal His10-tag. The enzyme was extracted from
broken cells with buffer containing 1% (wt/vol)
4-trans(4transpropylcyclohexyl)-cyclohexyl-α-maltoside and puriﬁed by metal
afﬁnity chromatography. The subunits of the enzyme were characterized by mass
spectrometry. The puriﬁed enzyme was applied to electron microscopy grids, and
high-resolution cryo-EM data were collected with a Titan Krios instrument. ATP
synthase particles were picked with crYOLO (30), and a variety of related
structures were determined by hierarchical classiﬁcation and reﬁnement with
RELION (31). The resolution and interpretability of speciﬁc regions of the maps
were improved by focused local reﬁnement of the membrane domain, the membrane
extrinsic catalytic domain, the PS, the stator and the bδ-subunit, and these
subregion reconstructions were assembled together into composite structures and
reﬁned into atomic models. Merging of substate particle sets at the expense of
substate distinction improved the resolutions in the F1, membrane, rotor, and bδ
domains, and reclassiﬁcation of all particle data at the expense of rotational
state distinction, while masking the membrane domain, revealed the presence of
BD. Fourier shell correlation curves and local resolution estimations were
calculated with RELION. Model building into focused maps was performed with Coot
(32), and real space reﬁnement with PHENIX (33–35). The starting model comprised
the crystal structures of the F1-domain of M. smegmatis ATP synthase (PDB ID
code 6FOC) (6) and the c9-ring in the presence (PDB ID code 4V1F) and absence of
BD (PDB ID code 4V1G) (5). All other subunits were built de novo. Model geometry
and density ﬁt validation were performed by MolProbity (36, 37) and EMRinger
(38), respectively.

* data
###
7NJR (EMD-12412–12416), 7NJS (EMD-12417–12421), 7NJT (EMD-12422), 7NJU
(EMD-12423), 7NJV (EMD-12424), 7NJW (EMD-12425), 7NJX (EMD-12426), 7NJY
(EMD-12427), 7NK7 (EMD-12432), 7NK9 (EMD-12434), 7NKB (EMD-12436), 7NKD
(EMD-12438), 7NKH (EMD-12439), 7NKP (EMD-12404), 7NKK (EMD12442), 7NKL
(EMD-12406), 7NKJ (EMD-12441), 7NL9 (EMD-12461), 7NKN (EMD-12444), and 7NKQ
(EMD-12446).

Data Availability. Protein models and electron density map data have been
deposited in the Protein Data Bank and the Electron Microscopy Data Bank under
the following accession numbers: 7NJK (EMD-12377–12381), 7NJL (EMD12382–12386),
7NJM (EMD-12387–12391), 7NJN (EMD-12392–12396), 7NJO (EMD-12397–12401), 7NJP
(EMD-12402–12406), 7NJQ (EMD-12407–12411),
###

* acknowledgements
###
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This work was supported by the Medical Research Council via
grants MR/M009858/1 and MC_UU_00015/8 (to J.E.W.). We thank Y. Chaban, A.
Siebert, and staff of eBIC, Diamond Light Source for expert operation of
microscopes and advice on data collection.
###

* references
###
1. T. V. A. Nguyen et al., Bedaquiline resistance: Its emergence, mechanism, and prevention. Clin. Infect. Dis. 66, 1625–1630 (2018).
2. M. Luo et al., Bedaquiline inhibits the yeast and human mitochondrial ATP synthases.
Commun. Biol. 3, 452 (2020).
3. L. Chiaradia et al., Dissecting the mycobacterial cell envelope and deﬁning the composition of the native mycomembrane. Sci. Rep. 7, 12807 (2017).
4. J. E. Walker, The ATP synthase: The understood, the uncertain and the unknown. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 41, 1–16 (2013).
5. L. Preiss et al., Structure of the mycobacterial ATP synthase Fo rotor ring in complex
with the anti-TB drug bedaquiline. Sci. Adv. 1, e1500106 (2015).
6. A. T. Zhang, M. G. Montgomery, A. G. W. Leslie, G. M. Cook, J. E. Walker, The structure
of the catalytic domain of the ATP synthase from Mycobacterium smegmatis is a target
for developing antitubercular drugs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 4206–4211 (2019).
7. J. E. Walker, V. K. Dickson, The peripheral stalk of the mitochondrial ATP synthase.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1757, 286–296 (2006).
8. P. Lu, H. Lill, D. Bald, ATP synthase in mycobacteria: Special features and implications
for a function as drug target. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1837, 1208–1218 (2014).
9. E. Morales-Rios, M. G. Montgomery, A. G. W. Leslie, J. E. Walker, Structure of ATP synthase from Paracoccus denitriﬁcans determined by X-ray crystallography at 4.0 Å resolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, 13231–13236 (2015).
10. M. Sobti et al., Cryo-EM structures of the autoinhibited E. coli ATP synthase in three
rotational states. eLife 5, e21598 (2016).
11. H. Guo, T. Suzuki, J. L. Rubinstein, Structure of a bacterial ATP synthase. eLife 8,
43128 (2019).
12. W. Junge, H. Sielaff, S. Engelbrecht, Torque generation and elastic power transmission in the rotary FOF1-ATPase. Nature 459, 364–370 (2009).
13. M. Allegretti et al., Horizontal membrane-intrinsic α-helices in the stator a-subunit of
an F-type ATP synthase. Nature 521, 237–240 (2015).
14. H. Guo et al., Structure of mycobacterial ATP synthase bound to the tuberculosis
drug bedaquiline. Nature 589, 143–147 (2021).
15. T. E. Spikes, M. G. Montgomery, J. E. Walker, Structure of the dimeric ATP synthase
from bovine mitochondria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 23519–23526 (2020).
16. S. H. Roh et al., Cryo-EM and MD infer water-mediated proton transport and autoinhibition mechanisms of Vo complex. Sci. Adv. 6, eabb9605 (2020).
17. M. Sobti et al., Cryo-EM structures provide insight into how E. coli F1Fo ATP synthase
accommodates symmetry mismatch. Nat. Commun. 11, 2615 (2020).
 mez, T. Meier, High-resolution structure of the
18. D. Pogoryelov, O. Yildiz, J. D. Faraldo-Go
rotor ring of a proton-dependent ATP synthase. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 1068–1073 (2009).
€ rsch, The regulatory subunit ε in Escherichia coli FOF119. H. Sielaff, T. M. Duncan, M. Bo
ATP synthase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Bioenerg. 1859, 775–788 (2018).
20. W. G. Saw et al., Disrupting coupling within mycobacterial F-ATP synthases subunit ε
causes dysregulated energy production and cell wall biosynthesis. Sci. Rep. 9, 16759 (2019).
21. C. F. Wong et al., A systematic assessment of mycobacterial F1 -ATPase subunit ε’s role
in latent ATPase hydrolysis. FEBS J. 288, 818–836 (2021).
22. I. N. Watt, M. G. Montgomery, M. J. Runswick, A. G. W. Leslie, J. E. Walker, Bioenergetic cost of making an adenosine triphosphate molecule in animal mitochondria.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 16823–16827 (2010).
23. T. E. Spikes, M. G. Montgomery, J. E. Walker, Interface mobility between monomers
in dimeric bovine ATP synthase participates in the ultrastructure of inner mitochondrial membranes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2021012118 (2021).
24. A. Hotra et al., Deletion of a unique loop in the mycobacterial F-ATP synthase γ subunit sheds light on its inhibitory role in ATP hydrolysis-driven H+ pumping. FEBS J. 283,
1947–1961 (2016).
25. A. L. Cozens, J. E. Walker, The organization and sequence of the genes for ATP synthase subunits in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus 6301. Support for an endosymbiotic origin of chloroplasts. J. Mol. Biol. 194, 359–383 (1987).
26. H. S. Van Walraven, R. Lutter, J. E. Walker, Organization and sequences of genes for
the subunits of ATP synthase in the thermophilic cyanobacterium Synechococcus 6716. Biochem. J. 294 ( Pt 1), 239–251 (1993).
27. A. L. Cozens, J. E. Walker, A. L. Phillips, A. K. Huttly, J. C. Gray, A sixth subunit of ATP
synthase, an Fo component, is encoded in the pea chloroplast genome. EMBO J. 5,
217–222 (1986).
28. J. E. Walker, M. J. Runswick, M. Saraste, Subunit equivalence in Escherichia coli and
bovine heart mitochondrial F1Fo ATPases. FEBS Lett. 146, 393–396 (1982).
29. S. L. Schreiber, The rise of molecular glues. Cell 184, 3–9 (2021).
30. T. Wagner et al., SPHIRE-crYOLO is a fast and accurate fully automated particle picker
for cryo-EM. Commun. Biol. 2, 218 (2019).
31. J. Zivanov et al., New tools for automated high-resolution cryo-EM structure determination in RELION-3. eLife 7, e42166 (2018).
32. P. Emsley, B. Lohkamp, W. G. Scott, K. Cowtan, Features and development of Coot.
Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 66, 486–501 (2010).
33. P. V. Afonine et al., Real-space reﬁnement in PHENIX for cryo-EM and crystallography. Acta Crystallogr. D Struct. Biol. 74, 531–544 (2018).
34. P. V. Afonine et al., New tools for the analysis and validation of cryo-EM maps and
atomic models. Acta Crystallogr. D Struct. Biol. 74, 814–840 (2018).
35. D. Liebschner et al., Macromolecular structure determination using X-rays, neutrons
and electrons: Recent developments in Phenix. Acta Crystallogr. D Struct. Biol. 75,
861–877 (2019).
36. I. W. Davis et al., MolProbity: All-atom contacts and structure validation for proteins
and nucleic acids. Nucleic Acids Res. 35, W375-83 (2007).
37. V. B. Chen et al., MolProbity: All-atom structure validation for macromolecular crystallography. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 66, 12–21 (2010).
38. B. A. Barad et al., EMRinger: Side chain-directed model and map validation for 3D
cryo-electron microscopy. Nat. Methods 12, 943–946 (2015).
###



